Version 1.3.13 Release 7/5/2020
*Fixed bug in handling situation when last time point in one replicate is missing
*Prints to console message when running Gene Ontology enrichment instead
of usual STEM cluster since only one or two tab delimited columns
*Fixed command line usage message in STEM

Version 1.3.12 Release 6/23/2019
*Updated STEM to handle changes to the GO which had caused some download
links to be broken
*Slight adjustments to GUI to remove some parts being cutoff in recent Java versions
*Clarified in manual batch mode still needs to be run with a computer with a display

Version 1.3.11 Release 12/26/2016
*Fixed issue in which profile interface was appearing
as blank without resizing the window on macs

Version 1.3.10 Release 11/24/2016
*Fixed bug when running a batch GO analysis ('-o option included') that
could cause no output to be produced in certain cases.

Version 1.3.9 Release 9/10/2016
*Changed license on STEM so now it is GPL v3.0
*updated/added/removed entries and filenames in the GO list to be current 
*removed automatic download of gene locations for chromosome viewer
since was not supported by the site previously downloading it from
*fixed a bug causing the 'Name' field in the chromosome viewer not to be parsed.
Only 'ID' and 'Alias' fields were parsed
*fixed an obsucre bug that occurs when sorting profiles when doing GO analysis
and sorting profiles based on few genes 

Version 1.3.8 Release 2/24/2012
*Added the ability to save the main interface as a svg by clicking the disk icon and giving a .svg extension
*Removed default cross-references as no longer valid

Version 1.3.7 Release 1/1/2011
*Added fold enrichments to GO tables. This is the observed number of genes divided by the expected.
*Added a feature to run GO enrichments for a batch set of genes and output to a text file. This can be done with the 
flag -o GOoutfile.txt when launching STEM from a command line. All the gene sets should be in one file with a '#' header
line to denote breaks between gene sets. GOoutfile.txt is the file where the GO output will be written.  
*Updated list of GO annotations available for download
*Filter NOT modified annotations in annotation files (effects a very small percentage of annotations)
*Behind the scenes reorganization of code

Version 1.3.6 Release 7/31/2009
* Changed annotation downloads from the geneontology from being ftp based
to being http to fix connection problems.

Version 1.3.5 Release 7/11/2009
Updated the GO and Cross-reference list. Human cross reference file is no longer
available for automatic download. Also specifying location files based on GO category
selections is no longer the default action of the interface. All changes 
were in stem\ST.java

Version 1.3.4 Release 1/15/2009
Source code released. Behind the scenes reorganization of code.

Version 1.3.3. Release 8/10/2008
*Fixed bug that caused profile vector not to be saved correctly in the headerwhen saving a gene table.
*Fixed bug causing gene chromosome locations not to be downloaded correctly for some species.
*Removed ipi and vega from biomart_species.txt file.

Version 1.3.2 Release 5/5/2008
*Fixed bug that sometimes caused repeat files not to be listed on repeat 
interface when loading them from a defaults file through STEM interface

Version 1.3.1 Release 3/31/2008
*Updated STEM so that it could parse the latest gene ontology files which 
now have the regulates relationship between some categories.

Version 1.3 Release 2/18/2008
1. Added a chromosome viewer integrated into STEM - see manual for more 
details
2. Added the option to save settings and load them directly into STEM.
Settings are saved through the disk icon on the STEM interface, and then 
loaded into STEM through the "Load Saved Settings" button on the input 
interface.
3. Added the option to display y-axis tick marks on the main input 
interface when plotting genes. Also added the option not to display the 
profile ID, model profile, line, or ordering details on the main 
interface.
4. Added the option to run STEM in batch from the command line
5. Corrected the STEM documentation on the filtering "Minimum Correlation 
between Repeats" parameter, in the case of three or more repeats the 
criteria is based on the pairwise mean, not the median
6. Fixed bug that prevented real time spacing from being recogonized in 
the defaults file
6. Removed the
"-ms512M" option to start STEM from the cmd files

Version 1.2.2b Released 10/13/2006
1. Fixed bug in the display of p-values that were extremely close to 0 
(<~10^-300), but not exactly 0.  In Java 1.5 they were being displayed as 
Infinity to some large negative power, and in Java 1.4 they were being 
displayed as a really long number to some power.

Version 1.2.1b Released 9/18/2006
1. A memory leak was fixed which previously could have caused STEM to run 
slower when executing it multiple times without restarting Java

Version 1.2.0b Released 9/5/2006
Added several interface options which can be accessed on the main 
interface window (see also http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jernst/stem/newoptions.html).  These 
options allow:
1.  All non-filtered genes expression profiles to be displayed on the main 
interface
2.  Just gene expression profiles of a given GO category or gene set to be 
displayed on the main interface
3.  The x-axis on the main interface and detail profile windows (cluster 
windows for k-means) to be scaled based on the real sampling rate, 
previously all time points could only be uniformly spaced
4.  The scale of y-axis of the detail profile windows (cluster windows for 
k-means) to be fixed to user defined parameters, previously the only 
option would be for STEM to determine each one automatically

Version 1.1.3b Released 8/13/2006
1. Added buttons to all tables to copy the content of the tables
to the clipboard.  Also can copy just the gene names to the clipboard
for gene tables.
2. Fixed a bug in the printing of the header of GO Category gene tables 
when saving to a file
3. Added back to the list of GO annotations Glossina morsitans (Sanger 
GeneDB). Added Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01 (PseduoCap) to the list of GO 
annotation sources.

Version 1.1.2b Released 4/26/2006
1. Minor bug fixed in computing expected counts.  If a gene could match 
multiple profiles equally well during a permutation, which usually only 
happens if genes with missing data are not filtered, then the expected 
counts were slightly lower than they should have been.

Version 1.1.1b Released 4/25/2006 
1.  STEM now has a new default gene filtering criteria.  Under the new 
filtering criteria called 'Maximum-Minimum' a gene is filtered if the 
difference between its largest value and its smallest value after 
transformation (Log normalize data, Normalize data, or No 
normalization/add 0) is less than the value of the 'Minimum Absolute 
Expression Change Parameter'.  The original filtering criteria, based on 
the absolute expression change from time point 0, is now called 
'Difference from 0' and can be specified under the 'Change should be based 
on' option.  The 'Maximum-Minimum' filtering criteria has the property 
that the set of genes that would be filtered is invariant to permuting the 
order of time points, which is not necessarily true under the 'Difference 
from 0' filtering criteria.  The 'Maximum-Minimum' filtering criteria is 
thus arguably a more appropriate filtering criteria to use in
conjunction with STEM's permutation test.
2.  STEM now has the option under Advanced Options-->Model Profiles for 
its permutation test not to permute time point 0.  The permutation test is 
used to computed the expected number of genes assigned to a profile.  
Previously and still the default option in STEM is for the permutation 
test to compute the expected counts based on a permutation of all time 
points.  This is generally the preferred method since it can detect 
important changes between time point 0 and the immediate next sampled time 
point.  However for some experimental designs particularly two channel 
experiments where time point 0 serves as the reference sample, not 
permuting time point 0 is also useful.  The reason is that the asymmetry 
in the experimental design will allow a gene's time point 0 value 
expression value before any transformation to be known with lower variance 
than the other time points, and this difference can cause some profiles to 
be more likely to be significant when permuting time point 0.  When not 
permuting time point 0, profiles found significant are significant 
independent of the asymmetry in the experimental design between time point 
0 and the other time points.
3.  A bug was fixed that caused some genes not to be filtered that should 
have been based on the absolute expression change parameter.  This bug 
only occurred when allowing genes with missing data, choosing log 
normalize or normalize data, and having no repeats.  Only genes with 
missing data could have incorrectly slipped through filter, and only a 
smaller percent would probably actually have done so.
4.  The error messages for parsing the defaults file was improved in a few 
places.

Version 1.1.0b Released 3/20/2006
1.  STEM now provides an implementation of k-means algorithm in addition 
to the still default STEM clustering method designed for short time series 
gene expression data published in the Bioinformatics/ISMB 2005 paper.
2.  Extremely small p-values are computed almost exactly, previously any 
p-value below 10^-12 was returned as 0.
3.  Added Cow (EBI) to the list of GO annotation sources and removed 
Glossina morsitans (Sanger GeneDB) which was no longer active on the GO 
ftp site
4.  When a table window is maximized all extra window area is now given to 
the table instead of some to the button panel
5.  When comparing two data sets it is now possible to automatically load 
in the define gene set dialog box the set of genes filtered in the other 
data set by setting the profile ID value to "-1" and pressing "Select 
Genes".
6.  Changed the default start memory option for STEM from -ms1024M to 
-ms512M in the STEM command files.
 
Version 1.0.7b Released 1/5/2006
1.  When comparing data sets there is again the option to display gene and
GO tables based on the set of genes in the intersection of two profiles.
When querying a user defined gene set there is again the option to display
gene and GO tables based on the set of genes in the intersection of the
user defined gene set and the set of genes assigned to a profile or
cluster of profiles.  These options are described in the user manual, and
appeared in STEM before the release of version 1.04b when they were
inadvertently removed.
2.  If the window containing the graph of the genes assigned to a model
profile is resized, then the graph of the genes is now rescaled
accordingly.
3.  If the "Order Profiles By" window or the "Order Clusters By"
window is open, but minimized, pressing its corresponding button on the
main interface now makes the window visible again.  Previously there would
be no response when pressing the button in that situation.
4.  If STEM cannot save the contents of a table to a file because another
application has a write lock on the file, then a new window containing an
error message now pops up.  Previously the error message was just printed
to the console window.

Version 1.0.6b Released 11/21/2005
1.  Bug fixed that prevented GO results from being displayed on computers 
that default to a language for which numbers have a ',' in places in the 
English system where there is a '.' (e.g. 3,21 instead of 3.21).
2.  All numbers in tables are now displayed under the English system

Version 1.0.5b Released 11/1/2005 
1. Bug fixed that could in certain circumstances cause STEM not to use all 
available Gene Ontology (GO) annotations.  If a gene symbol in an official 
15 column annotation files had a lower case letter in it and matched a 
gene symbol in the data file, STEM incorrectly did not use the annotation.  
This bug however does not effect the EBI cross references. This bug also 
does not affect users providing their own two column gene annotation 
files.  
2. Removed reference to the defunct GenBank (Compugen), Gene Index 
(TIGR), and UniProt (Compugen) annotation sources.  Update reference to TIGR and 
TAIR annotations for Arabidopsis thaliana to reflect they are now merged 
into one file.

Version 1.0.4b Released 10/25/2005 
1.  Bug fixed that caused the advanced options help info windows not to be 
closeable until the advanced options dialog window was closed.  This bug 
only appears when using Java 1.5, and was not present with Java 1.4. 
2.  Slight changes to the color scheme for significant model profiles 
3.  Changed the sample comparison data file included with STEM

Version 1.0.3b Released 7/17/2005
1.  The parsing algorithm of the gene ontology file was modified 
internally. The algorithm previously relied on assumptions about the 
format of the file which is and has been true, but are not documented to 
necessarily be the case in the future.  These changes currently have no 
visible effect.  Also more informative error messages were added in the 
event there are problems parsing the gene ontology file.

Version 1.0.2b Released 7/15/2005
1.  Bug fixed in parsing the very last category term in the gene ontology 
file. This was causing a null pointer exception to be thrown with the 
settings specified in defaultsGuilleminSample.txt and the latest 
ontology, but was not noticeable with previous versions of the ontology.

Version 1.0.1b Released 7/1/2005
1.  Bug fixed allowing the gene table for a GO category to now be saved 
when doing a GO enrichment analysis on non-time series data.

Version 1.0.0b Released 6/24/2005
